[rfc] Adds RFC for saved objects encrypted attributes. (#33740)
elastic/kibana: rfcs/text/0002_encrypted_attributes.md

```

If the wrapper gets a request to create, or update a registered type.

It would use the following procedure.
- extract and delete the registered encrypted attributes
- use the resulting id, type, and attributes as additional authentication data
  encrypt the extracted attributes.
- add the encrypted attributes back to the saved object and pass it to the
  wrapped client.

The secret attribute would be scrubbed from all get, bulkGet, and find
operations. Using the following procedure

- Forward call to wrapped client
- If no results or results blank return
- For each result
  - if the result type is a secret type
    - delete the encrypted attribute field
  - otherwise keep the results intact

The wrapper will be injected for all saved object clients.

## Benefits

None of the registered types will expose their encrypted details. The saved
objects with their unencrypted attributes could still be obtained and searched
on. The wrapper will follow all the security and spaces filtering of saved
objects so that only users with appropriate permissions will be able to obtain
the scrubbed objects or _save_ objects with encrypted attributes.

## Possible Problems

> Consumers of scrubbed objects may try to modify them causing the encrypted

Reviewer: The objects that store encrypted values are part of the "hidden types" feature I believe. The changes to the management UI will only include visible types in the future with the addition of opting out by type as well. As long as that stays true, the management UI shouldn't touch objects with encrypted values. This does remind me I should validate object types on import to ensure they're eligible types.

> Consumers of scrubbed objects may try to modify them causing the encrypted

Reviewer 2: The most recent proposal is switching from the "hidden types" based approach to using "encrypted attributes" on publicly visible saved objects with some restrictions.

> Consumers of scrubbed objects may try to modify them causing the encrypted

Reviewer: This could be interesting for import / export as it would cause a record to fail being imported unless we add UX to handle that.

from the default saved objects client. And instead force all updates to go
through the plugin directly.

## Decrypting attributes

In order to get the resulting decrypted attributes back the plugin would require
a method be registered which would be passed the saved object including the
decrypted attributes then return an invokable method that would perform the
retrieval of the saved object the decryption and invoking of the desired method.

```JS
const actionMethod = server.plugins.encryptedAttributes.buildDecryptionContext(id, type, (savedObject) => {
  const { username, password } = savedObject.secretsParams;
  ... // do integration with third party
});
... // later
actionMethod(); // retrieve, decrypt, and invoke above method
```

## Benefits

No explicit access to a method that takes in an encrypted string exists. And no
access to the private key used is exposed through the plugin. If the type was not
registered no decryption is possible. No need to handle the saved object with
the encrypted attributes reducing the risk of accidentally returning it in a
handler.

# Drawbacks

- This would add the ability to encrypt data on any saved object in the system.

> - Possibly add performance issues to retrieving saved objects.

Reviewer 2: The encryption/decryption of the attributes should be the most CPU intensive operation, which should only occur when we're creating new objects which contain "secrets" or when we're decrypting the "secrets" in the background. We shouldn't be performing these operations for other saved object types, so this shouldn't impact these. 

Is there another performance implication which you were referring to which I'm not aware of?

Author: The biggest concern about performance I have is for the bulk operations. The wrapper essentially needs to iterate all returned objects regardless of type, generally this does not present a problem on small 10, 100, 1000 sized return sets. I was a little concerned about the >=10k results but doing some benchmarks it should not add significant time to be concerned with. More time will probably be spent waiting for results and parsing them than in this iteration. 

I don't think it will be a problem if the normal usage and calls are not returning that many hits which I don't think they are but I am not that sure.

Reviewer 2: I don't think another O(n) operation is that problematic in this use-case.

Author: Well its not zero additional time and there is a lot more code at play than just a simple array iteration. For about 10k elements it'll add 2-3ms if doing 100k it'd be 20-30ms, I don't think its anything to stop the work just not as optimal as doing all the logic in a single iteration over the elements but we cannot really have that type of processing with the bulk requests and wrappers the way their structured. So it might not have been worth mentioning.

> - Might be complicated to test along with spaces and security

Author: Yes my concern does stem from those also being a middleware and things playing nicely together. I was thinking that we might want tests that run with all these wrappers to ensure this one does not allow the others to break. But I am with you it should be pretty independent.

> - Might be complicated to test along with spaces and security

Reviewer 2: Awesome, I think augmenting the existing saved object api integration tests in x-pack/test which run with Security and/or Spaces enabled should be sufficient for the time being.

- Could be too complicated in general
- The attributes that are encrypted have to be defined and if they change they
  need to be migrated.

# Alternatives

Only allow this to be used within the Actions service itself where the details
of the saved object are handled there directly. And the saved objects are
`hidden` but still use the security and spaces wrappers.

# Adoption strategy

Integration should be pretty easy which would include depending on the plugin.
And registering the desired saved object type with it. And building and using
the desired decryption contexts.

# How we teach this

`encryptedAttributes` as the name of the `thing` where it's seen as a separate
extension on top of the saved object service.

Provide a readme.md in the plugin directory with examples for how to depend on
the plugin and define a type has hidden attributes.

# Unresolved questions

> - Is `encryptedAttributes` an acceptable name for the plugin

Author: I can definitely see your point. I think I like `savedObjectAttributeCrypto` it has the necessary context to make sense. 👍

> - Is building a method that receives the object with the decrypted attributes

Author: Yes, that is what I am referring to, and I am a little concerned that doing it this way might lead to hacks to work around the syntax or coarse the syntax for other purposes or other code styles perhaps with promises or something. I think this syntax should be usable in most circumstances, just wanted another opinion.

> - Is building a method that receives the object with the decrypted attributes

Reviewer 2: I think `Promise` and `async`/`await` are becoming the new "standard" so using a callback here does seem a little out of place. If our intent is to try to use a callback here to limit the scope of the decrypted values, it'd be rather easy for a consumer to turn this into a Promise and negate that potential benefit.

> - Is building a method that receives the object with the decrypted attributes

Author: It makes sense to turn this into a Promise, but I'm thinking more of returning a function that returns a promise so that saved object is not immediately decrypted but only decrypted when it is closer to use. The point of the code is to try and capture the audit log closer to the usage of the saved object not sure that is entirely possible.

> - Is building a method that receives the object with the decrypted attributes

Author: On second thought it makes no difference, I should just return a promise to the object then the code would become.

```JS
const fullObject = await server.plugins.encryptedAttributes.get(it, type);
const { username, password } = fullObject.secretsParams;
```

  make sense?
- Are there other use-cases that are not served with that interface?

> - How would this work with migrations, if the attribute names wanted to be

Author: I am not sure about the restrictions on whose allowed to define migrations. @mikecote might know more. I would think those plugins that define a saved object type would provide the necessary migration code for the encrypted attributes. My concern is if the migration functions will have access to the decryption method

> - How would this work with migrations, if the attribute names wanted to be

Reviewer: As of 7.1 we're enforcing migrations to be defined where the mappings are defined. The PR implementing this can be found here https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/31739.

- Start Date: 2019-03-22

> - RFC PR: https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/34526

Reviewer 3: I believe this is suppose to link to _this_ PR, not the implementation. The idea being that in the future you can easily find this RFC PR which might contain important discussion/context.

Reviewer 4: Ah, silly me. Will change, thanks!

- Kibana Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary

> In order to support the action service we need a way to encrypt/decrypt

Reviewer 3: I'd rather not explicitly couple this to actions even in the summary language. "In order to support storing secrets in saved objects" or something like that

attributes on saved objects that works with security and spaces filtering as
well as performing audit logging. Sufficiently hides the private key used and
removes encrypted attributes from being exposed through regular means.

# Basic example

Register saved object type with the `encrypted_saved_objects` plugin:

```typescript
server.plugins.encrypted_saved_objects.registerType({
  type: 'server-action',
  attributesToEncrypt: new Set(['credentials', 'apiKey']),
  // Optional list of attributes that might not contain user specified data.

>   attributesToExcludeFromAAD: new Set(['temporaryState']),

Reviewer 3: What's the use case for `attributesToExcludeFromAAD`? And what does `AAD` stand for?

Reviewer 3: It stands for "Additional authenticated data" according to https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/33740/files#diff-30038d010fb873cb850c1ac05ce1610aR117

That should be defined somewhere earlier so it doesn't come as a surprise here. I'd still like to understand the use case though.

Reviewer 4: I can remove it from here and leave only in `Detailed design` section if it feels better.

saved object client. This can be added from the `x-pack` plugin.

## General

To be able to manage saved objects with encrypted attributes from any plugin one should
do the following:

1. Define `encrypted_saved_objects` plugin as a dependency.
2. Add attributes to be encrypted in `mappings.json` file for the respective saved object type. These attributes should
always have a `binary` type since they'll contain encrypted content as a `Base64` encoded string and should never be
searchable or analyzed. This makes defining of attributes that require encryption explicit and auditable, and significantly
simplifies implementation:
```json
{
 "server-action": {
   "properties": {
     "name": { "type": "keyword" },
     "credentials": { "type": "binary" },
     "apiKey": { "type": "binary" }
   }
 }
}
```
3. Register saved object type and attributes that should be encrypted with `encrypted_saved_objects` plugin:
```typescript
server.plugins.encrypted_saved_objects.registerType({
  type: 'server-action',
  attributesToEncrypt: new Set(['credentials', 'apiKey']),
  // Optional list of attributes that might not contain user specified data.

>   attributesToExcludeFromAAD: new Set(['temporaryState']),

Reviewer 3: This should be removed from this example, right? As far as I can tell, this property is irrelevant here.

Reviewer 4: I'll keep it here, just change example mapping to cover this case.

});
```

Since `encrypted_saved_objects` adds its own wrapper (`EncryptedSavedObjectsClientWrapper`) into `SavedObjectsClient`
wrapper chain consumers will be able to create, update, delete and retrieve saved objects using standard Saved Objects API.
Two main responsibilities of the wrapper are:

* It encrypts attributes that are supposed to be encrypted during `create`, `bulkCreate` and `update` operations
* It strips encrypted attributes from **any** saved object returned from the Saved Objects API

As noted above the wrapper is stripping encrypted attributes from saved objects returned from the API methods, that means
that there is no way at all to retrieve encrypted attributes using standard Saved Objects API unless `encrypted_saved_objects`
plugin is disabled. This potentially can lead to the situation when consumer retrieves saved object, updates its non-encrypted
properties and passes that same object to the `update` Saved Objects API method without re-defining encrypted attributes.

> At this stage we consider this as a developer mistake and don't prevent it from happening in any way apart from logging

Reviewer 3: What is the actual consequence of this mistake? Do the encrypted fields get overwritten to nothing or just ignored and untouched? If the latter, I don't even think we need to warn via logging. If the former, than I think we should be throwing an error rather than logging.

Reviewer 4: > Do the encrypted fields get overwritten to nothing or just ignored and untouched?

We use `_update` API under the hood right now, so we'll have a partial update and existing encrypted fields will stay untouched. __But__ if attributes that are being updated are included into AAD then after update one wouldn't be able to decrypt content anymore.

That's another reason why we have `attributesToExcludeFromAAD`, if you want to allow user (that isn't allowed to decrypt attributes) to modify some of the non-encrypted properties of the saved object with encrypted attributes (e.g. change title, but not credentials) then you'd exclude these attributes from AAD so that updates don't matter to decryption/encryption.

So we have two `update` cases here:

* without attributes to be encrypted **and with** with some of the attributes that contribute to AAD
* without attributes to be encrypted **and without** any of the attributes that contribute to AAD (e.g only with attributes mentioned in `attributesToExcludeFromAAD`)

In the latter case we may or may not "debug" log, I think it's useful, but don't have a strong opinion and can remove `debug` log if you think it's not needed.

But the former case is tricky and can have several outcomes:
* all or some attributes that contribute to AAD are included **and** they have the same content ---> decryption will still work, it can potentially be a valid use case
* all or some attributes that contribute to AAD are included **but** some of them have a different content ---> decryption won't work anymore

The problem is that plugin can't know whether or not content of the attributes has changed. So throwing here may be too restrictive, depending on what we think are valid use cases.

Am I missing or overcomplicating something here @kobelb @epixa ?

Reviewer 2: > Am I missing or overcomplicating something here @kobelb @epixa ?

You've summarized the situation quite well! Like you've illustrated, it really becomes quite complicated and I think the approach which you've outlined in your RFC is a good middle-ground for the initial implementation.

Reviewer 3: Sounds good

behalf of the internal Kibana user and hence isn't supposed to be called within user request context.

**Note:** the fact that saved object with encrypted attributes is created using standard Saved Objects API within a 
particular user and space context, but retrieved out of any context makes it unclear how consumers are supposed to 
provide that context and retrieve saved object from a particular space. Current plan for `getDecryptedAsInternalUser` 
method is to accept a third `BaseOptions` argument that allows consumers to specify `namespace` that they can retrieve
from the request using public `spaces` plugin API.

## Encryption and decryption

Saved object attributes are encrypted using [@elastic/node-crypto](https://github.com/elastic/node-crypto) library. Please
take a look at the source code of this library to know how encryption is performed exactly, what algorithm and encryption 
parameters are used, but in short it's AES Encryption with AES-256-GCM that uses random initialization vector and salt.

As with encryption key for Kibana's session cookie, master encryption key used by `encrypted_saved_objects` plugin can be

> defined as a configuration value (`xpack.encrypted_saved_objects.encryptionKey`) via `kibana.yml`, but it's **highly 

Reviewer 3: We use camelCase in our kibana.yml configurations, so we should be consistent here.

Reviewer 4: Hmm, not sure what we should treat as a reference here :) We already have `xpack.index_management`, `xpack.license_management`, `xpack.oss_telemetry`, `xpack.remote_clusters`, `xpack.task_manager`, `xpack.upgrade_assistant` and (!) `xpack.xpack_main`

Reviewer 4: Soo, do you prefer using camelCase for new config prefixes or ...? For the stuff after prefix we use camelCase almost everywhere I believe, but the prefix is either shortened to something like `ilm` or uses underscores (likely to be consistent with plugin folder names).

Reviewer 3: Let's keep it consistent with the existing plugins then and not do camel case.

> recommended** to define this key in the [Kibana Keystore](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/current/secure-settings.html)

Reviewer 3: Is it possible to determine when we're using the keystore from within a plugin? If so, we should log a warning whenever we're not using the keystore for this, and codify that behavior in this RFC.

Reviewer 4: Well, not really, unless the core starts providing `source` (`env`, `config`, `keystore` or `cli`) with every config value.

We can potentially try to access key store directly from plugin and check whether value it has equals to the value we get from config, but we can't be 100% sure that actual config value came from keystore and not defined somewhere else (e.g. duplicated in yaml or env variable)... So I'm kind of on the fence here.

What do you think?

Reviewer 2: I think it'd be great if we could implement this behavior, but it feels like this should be considered out of scope for this RFC. We already have quite a few settings which ideally should be configured using the keystore and not using the kibana.yml. Do you see the usage in this RFC differing enough that this would become a prerequisite @epixa?

Reviewer 3: Works for me.

instead. The master key should be cryptographically safe and be equal or greater than 32 bytes.

To prevent certain vectors of attacks where raw content of encrypted attributes of one saved object is copied to another

> saved object that would unconsciously allow to decrypt content that was not supposed to be decrypted we rely on Additional

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
saved object which would unintentionally allow it to decrypt content that was not supposed to be decrypted we rely on Additional
```

authenticated data (AAD) during encryption and decryption. AAD consists of the following components:

* Saved object ID
* Saved object type
* Saved object attributes
 

> AAD does not include encrypted attributes themselves and attributes defined in optional `attributesToExcludeFromAAD` 

Reviewer 3: As I mentioned above, it would be good to explain _why_ you'd want to do this.

Reviewer 4: Sure, I'll add explanation (e.g. field can contain quite "heavy" data that, if involved into encryption/AAD generation, may slow down encryption/decryption significantly especially during bulk operations).

parameter provided during saved object type registration with `encrypted_saved_objects` plugin.

## Audit

> Encrypted attributes will most likely contain a sensitive information and any attempt to access these should be properly

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Encrypted attributes will most likely contain sensitive information and any attempt to access these should be properly
```

logged to allow any further audit procedures. The following events will be logged with Kibana audit log functionality:

* Successful attempt to encrypt attributes (incl. saved object ID, type and attributes names)
* Failed attempt to encrypt attribute (incl. saved object ID, type and attribute name)
* Successful attempt to decrypt attributes (incl. saved object ID, type and attributes names)
* Failed attempt to decrypt attribute (incl. saved object ID, type and attribute name)

In addition to audit log events we'll issue ordinary log events for any attempts to save, update or decrypt saved objects
with missing attributes that were supposed to be encrypted/decrypted based on the registration parameters. 

# Benefits

* None of the registered types will expose their encrypted details. The saved
objects with their unencrypted attributes could still be obtained and searched
on. The wrapper will follow all the security and spaces filtering of saved
objects so that only users with appropriate permissions will be able to obtain
the scrubbed objects or _save_ objects with encrypted attributes.

* No explicit access to a method that takes in an encrypted string exists. And no

> access to the private key used is exposed through the plugin. If the type was not

Reviewer 3: This isn't strictly true as plugins can access each other's config.

Reviewer 4: Yeah, will remove this sentence.

registered no decryption is possible. No need to handle the saved object with
the encrypted attributes reducing the risk of accidentally returning it in a
handler.

# Drawbacks

* Possibly have a performance impact on Saved Objects API operations that require encryption/decryption
* Will require non trivial tests to test functionality along with spaces and security

> * The attributes that are encrypted have to be defined and if they change they need to be migrated

Reviewer 3: Another drawback is that changing an encryption key will permanently break the existing encrypted attributes, effectively losing them.

Reviewer 4: Hmm, yeah, good point, I'll add here. I considered that as a limitation ("out of scope") of the RFC as I haven't heard any request for it to be in the initial version. API itself doesn't have such a flaw/drawback, it allows us to implement rotation mechanism on top of it once we need it. 

Key rotation deserves its own full blown RFC, e.g.:
```yaml
xpack.eso.encryptionKey:
  primary: 82Ffupq1uN/rlLIFHyUM7GkJcAAtCCPX #used to encrypt new data
  secondary: # used _only_ to decrypt old data
    - PPPtGN4Fh/aEQlqAC83BbeN9iQzzcMlO
    - 7Xso1va1kIvFW6xv8C9LH8crf2EVDVms
```
plus a privileged API endpoint for an emergency rotation that would re-encrypt existing data
```HTTP
POST /api/v1/eso/rotate/[optional saved object type]
```

Reviewer 2: Given that we don't currently support seamlessly rotating the encryption key for Reporting or Security's usage, I agree with considering this requirement out of scope. 

The only situations that I'm aware of where we presently recommend changing the encryption key are when it's been compromised/leaked, and in those situations, we'd need to change the encryption key and consider all data using the old encryption key invalid because it could have been manipulated using the compromised encryption key.
